I wanted to share a story of a boy a
fourteen-year-old boy Joshua Osborne who
was lying in coma at a hospital in
Wisconsin about two years ago
Joshua's brain was swelling with fluid
the doctors did a number of tests but
couldn't identify the root cause it was
getting very frustrating for Joshua's
parents and the doctors what could they
do to save Joshua the doctors then
recommended one final test one more test
using an experimental technology in the
fire the first procedure of its kind the
tests would look at Joshua cerebrospinal
fluid four pieces of DNA he turned out
the test was successful researchers were
able to look at Joshua's fluid
cerebrospinal fluid and pinpoint the
cause of his illness within a few hours
it turns out he was infected with an
obscure species of bacteria doctors were
able to eradicate it and save Joshua's
life in a matter of a few days this
ability to save Joshua's life comes from
being able to analyze DNA sequences
right very quick time and had much lower
cost today in fact the cost of DNA
sequencing has dropped from about 10
million dollars in 2007 to less than a
thousand dollars today at a rate much
faster than Moore's Law and
simultaneously the number of human
genome sequence during this period has
grown exponentially from getting the
first genome sequenced in 2007 to having
the publicly available thousand genome
data set in 2013 to the current
sequencing capacity in the world the
number of human genome sequenced is
doubling every 7 months and this is
placing a lot of stress in the computer
and storage infrastructure in these
centers a lot of these sequencing
centers and genomic labs are moving to
the cloud today
to address their computer and storage
needs it all started when a seminal
paper was published in 1866 the paper
based on years of studying visible
traits in pea plants by a person named
Gregor Mendel an Augustinian friar in
the Czech Republic today Mendel showed
how invisible factors were shaping the
visible traits of the pea plants the age
of genetics was born and Mendel's work
really laid the foundation of today's
genetics but with cloud big data and AI
the pace of innovation in genomics is
accelerating in 1990 the genome mixed
community started on an ambitious goal
the quest to sequence all the 3 billion
base pairs in the human genome after 13
years they completed it two years ahead
of schedule and at a cost of a little
less than three billion dollars now you
might ask why is this important well the
human genome project today has already
led to the discovery of more than 1,800
disease genes and there are over 2,000
genetic tests today that patients can
take to learn the risks of their
inherited diseases and for doctors to
cure these diseases to diagnose these
diseases the human genome project has
really enabled a new generation of
precision medicine today one that is
personalized
that's preventive and one that's
pre-emptive and with leveraging the
cloud and AI has helped the sequencing
analysis and diagnosis to run much
faster better and at a lower cost but
you might be wondering why is this a big
data problem let's take a look at some
of the big generators of data today and
extrapolate them by eight years to the
year 2025 Twitter today generates about
half a billion tweets
and in eight years is expected to need
probably about one to two petabytes of
incremental storage and year the largest
roster on immediate assets coming out of
the Square Kilometre Array that's going
to go live in 2020 will probably need
about one exabytes of incremental
storage every year YouTube will probably
need about one to two exabytes of
incremental storage and here today there
are about 2,500 high-throughput genomic
sequences in more than thousand centers
worldwide assuming a reasonable
projection rate they're going to require
anywhere between 2 to 40 exabytes of
incremental storage every year and that
is just for storing the human genome
alone this will be the Big Data of the
future so what are the challenges for
handling this genomics data at scale how
do you acquire and store this data
efficiently and cheaply
how do you process it and how do you
derive intelligence from it let's take a
look at how genomics data is first
acquired and processed it's a simple
five step process first you extract and
purify a sample either your saliva or a
sample of blood then you use a
sequencing machine a machine that
extracts the DNA from the nucleus inside
the cells in the sample and then you
align each of these sequences this
machine extracts about millions of
different fragments of sequences each
about 100 to 150 characters long you
then align each of these sequences to a
reference genome in this case a large
string that's about 3 billion base pairs
long fundamentally it's a very large
approximate string matching problem once
you have aligned each of these sequences
you then look for all possible genes
that can match in that location in a
process called variant calling and once
you have identified the gene that
matches you look for the difference in
the match between the sample and the
reference
and these differences the mutations are
then looked up against a knowledge base
to identify the impacts and the
implications of these mutations so
straightforward process but it turns out
that speed in this entire process is
going to be very critical if it's going
to be used by doctors for diagnosis
especially in life-threatening
situations so how do you go from sample
to sequence to alignment to variant
calling to identifying the mutations
understanding the effects all in a
matter of a few hours really need fast
algorithms and a very scalable computer
infrastructure one breakthrough and
genomic alignment algorithms came a few
years ago from a lecture that Bilbo
Lasky and Ravi Pandya from Microsoft
Research attended in this lecture the
basic idea was to use a large hash table
basically hash to all the locations in
the human reference genome where a
sequence of characters in each of the
sequences can occur the invented a
technology called snap and snap is now
blazingly fast in alignment and in
variant calling to give you a sense of
how fast it is it is about more than
seven times faster than some of the most
commonly used alignment algorithms today
and without sacrificing accuracy so this
speed in genomic analysis is enabling a
whole slew of new applications for
instance you can now monitor new
pathogens and identify outbreaks before
they can happen outbreaks like SARS or
the swine flu given the speed of snap
you can use it in controlling the
quality of the sequencing process as the
sequencing process goes through you run
snap figure out whether the quality of
the sequences are good if not go back
and redo the sequencing process very
often there are new reference versions
of the human genome that are released
you can also use snap then go back and
remap historically aligned sequences to
the new reference genome
all this is enabling a virtual cycle of
genomics and AI today the genomics data
that's being collected at a high
throughput is being analyzed by faster
and more intelligent algorithms on the
cloud that's enabling a file slew of new
applications which in turn is generating
demand for more new data to be generated
more new genomic data to be generated
cutting-edge research in genomics is
also now going beyond diagnosis and
looking at treatment options as well
using a technique called gene editing
the idea of gene editing is very simple
you give the biomedical researchers a
way to make very precise and targeted
changes to the genome now why would you
want to do this well there are two
reasons the researchers can totally
knock out or disable a gene and
understand its function for example in a
mice or if they know the function of the
gene and if it's a faulty gene say in a
human they can insert new DNA to restore
the original function of the gene this
sounds fantastic and the magical tool
that's enabling this is called CRISPR
let's look at how this whole gene
editing works the caste 9 enzyme there
is an enzyme called the caste 9 enzyme
that is shown in grey orange there that
is really like a molecular scissors it
binds to a strand of DNA of RNA called
the guide RNA the guide RNA takes the
kazna in enzyme and targets a specific
location of the genome the caste 9
enzyme this snips the DNA and cuts it
it's like a molecular scissors that just
cuts the strands of the DNA after the
cut you can either insert new gene you
can either insert new DNA to restore the
gene or you can disable the gene
completely it turns out that the very
critical step to enable gene editing is
to figure out where to
at the genome it turns out there are 18
billion combinations of guide RNA 300
guide RNAs about 20,000 human genes and
about 3,000 target locations on the
genome and there are two characteristics
that you want to keep in mind you know
for gene editing first of all given all
these guide RNAs you want to pick that
RNA which is able to target a specific
gene that you want to go and and modify
the function of second one you want to
reduce the on target activity the
probability that the guide RNA is going
to take the caste 9 enzyme and damage a
different part of the gene than you
originally intended that can lead to a
lot of side effects and it's nearly
impossible to quantify measured all of
these deficiencies in a wet lab the more
realistic alternative is to approach
this as a big data and a compute problem
researchers from Microsoft and from the
Broad Institute at MIT and Howard have
invented a new technique called CRISPR
ml the machine learning based technique
for identifying which guide RNA to use
to target each of the 20,000 genes in
the human genome it's basically like
similar to a website ranking for
relevance CRISPR demo looks at all of
the guide RNA the properties of the
guide RNA is the properties of the genes
the thermodynamics of the DNA and a
bunch of other characteristics and
builds a machine learning model to rank
each of the guide RNA in their target
efficiencies and using the power of the
azure cloud to scale they were able to
compute and store all of these on target
efficiencies and the off-target
activities in a matter of a few days now
if you want to see for example which
guide RNA to use to target a gene you
enter the name of the gene in this
CRISPR ml tool and you get back the
scores both the on target and the off
target scores from this genome or from
- this is really amazing progress in
jeanne editing in just a matter of a few
years very short few years using CRISPR
ml researchers are finding about a 20%
improvement in their targeting
efficiencies and about a 50% reduction
in the time and cost per gene so today
we are at a tipping point where Gino
makes the cloud data and AI are
empowering researchers to save and
change human lives we in the data and a
a community can partner with these
researchers in a quest to understand
what makes us us thank you
[Applause]
you